---
layout: post
title: "The State of Our Education System is Much Worse Than You Think"
subtitle: "The Prussian School Model & The Meta-Crisis"
date: 2023-06-18 23:45:13 -0400
background: '/img/posts/DSC_0167.jpg'
permalink: /the-state-of-our-education-system-is-much-worse-than-you-think/

---
We all know just how bad our public schools have become, just look at all the recent r/teacher adjacent posts that often end up being posted on the r/collapse subreddit [1](https://old.reddit.com/r/collapse/comments/1aomftb/trending_on_rteachers/),[2](https://old.reddit.com/r/collapse/comments/13e9k99/on_rteachers/),[3](https://old.reddit.com/r/collapse/comments/riuezy/i_hate_being_a_teacher_in_america/),[4](https://old.reddit.com/r/collapse/comments/rii7dj/rteachers_is_a_shitshow_right_now_the_content/). 

Educators, teachers, parents, researchers, and students accurately point out to a number of variables contributing to the deterioration of the quality of public education. Major ones include:

- Systemic defunding of the public education system
- Push to privatize the public system via charter schools
- Low salaries for teachers, and teacher shortages
- Overcrowed class sizes
- Decreasing parental involvement with at-home education
- Coroding influence of smartphones and social media
- Over-emphasis on standardized testing
- Funding inequities 

But I argue that even if we found a way to address all the above we would still be left with an education system that is wholly un-equipped to impart the next generation with the skills, the knowledge, and the vision of the future needed for our civilization to successfully overcome the challenges that will be thrown its way as [the great unraveling](https://www.postcarbon.org/publications/welcome-to-the-great-unraveling/) takes place. 

### Historical background on the origins of mass-schooling systems 

Before i get into what i think are the root problems with our education system, I think it's important to have a look back at history and understand where our current education system came from. Without turning this into an r/askhistory thread, the education system that dominates america and the vast majority of the world is based on the [prussian education system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prussian_education_system). Basically, the Prussian model was the first serious attempt at creating an educational system that was compulsory for everyone within a nation, which stood in contrast to the mainly religious and village-based education systems that existed prior that, where education was more decentralized and tailored to the needs of local population. 

The motivating reasons for creating this compulsory national schooling system are diverse. Part of it came from the enlightenment-era humanist figures within the prussian state who believed in the moral good that came with making education, especially liberal education, more accessible to the masses, but a larger part of the motivation came from the ruling elites and their desire to maintain control over the population by instilling a nationalist sense of obedience and a deference to authority figures. This isn't just speculation, there's lots of historical records showing that this was an explicit goal of the Prussian state. For example, Johann Felbiger, a prussian goverment minister who was heavily involved in advising Frederick II on the new compulsory national education system argued that the main goal of the education system should be to foster "loyalty, obedience, and devotion to the King" [\(Melton 2002, page 186\)](https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=2f69mKhTDNQC&oi=fnd&pg=PR7&ots=HavT3Dpp0j&sig=5uF3tUQVTKX18lAU3B0a6GrDjdc). According to Melton, the peasant rebellions of the 1740s–1750s were the primary reason that motivated the king’s interest in creating this national compulsory education.

The point i'm making is that contrary to popular belief the function of the education system as we know it today isnt to create a well-educated, creative, citizenry capable of critical thinking like was imagined by enlightenment humanists such as Humboldt. Instead, the primary function of national compulsory education systems is to serve the goals of those in governing positions, whether that be kings, dictators, autocrats, corporate CEOs, prime ministers, ect, to prevent the population from developing the cultural toolset to criticize and challenge dominant institutions of power.

Things like the pledge of allegiance, and signing the national anthem are quite explicit attempts at promoting loyalty to the state, but the prussian system excels at fostering a sense of obedience to authority through all the implicit messages it sends to students. For example, the huge emphasis on testing + grading ends up signaling to students that what's important isn't to think critically and independently about things, but rather what's important is to follow directives from authority figures and to do as you are told, because when you do this you receive the best grades. The more time you spend doing rote memorization of what your teachers tell you to study, the more you succeed in the system, and the more time you spend thinking deeply/creatively about the subject matter content the worse you do on tests. 

Having gone through grad school, I always found it hilarious that all the top research universities are deeply aware of just how terrible the public educational system is at fostering a productive environment for real learning. All the best universities structure their programs in complete opposition to the prussian model, they intentionally create a culture where challenging your professors is actively encouraged, learning occurs mainly via roundtable style seminars (instead of predominately via the lecture model), learning occurs via doing instead of testing, learning outside the classroom is heavily encouraged, involving the greater community in your learning is encouraged, even the literal physical design of the best universities are done in ways to maximize spontaneous social interactions by creating lots of 3rd spaces where people are free to be "moved by external leisure or internal pressures toward learning and research.”, as Humbolt said about what education should be about. I'm sure the others here who have gone through grad school know what im talking about. I'd even say that a feature shared by productive and successful grad students is the ability to unlearn all the implicit ways of knowing taught to you throughout high school and even in the first half of an undergrad degree.  

### Our education system can't keep afloat if people start questioning the validity of the progress narrative 

As I've established above, public education systems worldwide are modeled after the prussian education system, which aimed to instill in citizens a sense of obedience to authority. This approach was designed to minimize the risk of popular uprisings that could challenge the power of those in governance positions.

For the last 200 years this education model has had its issues but for the most part it managed to survive thanks to the carbon pulse and the age of constant economic growth that accompanied it. With the huge influx in public funding coming in from the massive energy surplus that fossil fuels introduced, lots of the core issues intrinsic to the prussian model where basically kept at bay by throwing trillions of dollars at the educational system (and even then only achieving very marginal improvements). The issues with the education system were also kept at bay because for the most part, the cultural zeitgeist around the myth of progress was true (atleast in the developing world). What I mean is that the dominant narrative about future expectations that you were told in school mostly turned out to be true. This shouldn't be overlooked when it comes to understanding the crisis unfolding in our schools today. Psychologically people need to be able to ground themselves in a narrative that affords them a certain level of stability.  It's easy to overlook the issues with the prussian education system when at the end of the day most people irrespective of how well they do in school can expect a rising quality of life, affordable housing, and good paying jobs. People can tolerate a certain amount of authoritarianism and come to respect it if they know that at the end of the day if you do what you are told you will be rewarded for it. 

Young people today know that the school system and the adults are lying to them about what the future holds. The buffer that the progress narrative once provided to grease the wheels of the whole system is quickly evaporating. Kids are now constantly put in a position that maximizes cognitive dissonance between the values they are taught in school and the reality they know to be true around them. This type of generalized sociological crisis, is precisely what is captured by the term "metacrisis". 

This is why i think the solutions to fix our education system run much deeper than simply a discussion about teacher salary, class size, or funding inequities. The issues run to the spiritual core of what education means, what it's for, and who is meant to benefit from it? As long as we avoid trying to answer those questions when thinking about reforming our education system we will keep failing future generations. 

### No Child Left Behind shows just how far off the deep end we are

Here's a concrete example that illustrates just how far off the deep end we are when it comes to not only reforming our education system but also just being able to accurately assess the problems in the first place. Take the now infamous "[No Child Left Behind Act](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No_Child_Left_Behind_Act)", one of the most significant educational reforms in the US since the G.I bill. No child left behind? sounds good right? So what did the bill aim to reform? What did the goverment identify as being the most pressing educational issue in deep need of reform?... The major concern was the that America's economic security would be threatened if nothing was done to boost school performance (this meant increasing grades) in the face of increasing international competition.... 

As most educators know, in practice what happened is that this "reform" just ended up doubling down on all the worst aspects of the prussian system. It increased the emphasis on testing, leaving even less time for teachers to foster creative learning environments, and instead incentivized teachers to become mere tutors to help students learn the best tricks to achieve high scores on standardized test so that they can get a good college placement. This is the type of outcome you would expect of an education system that prioritizes valuing technical capacities (scoring high on your ability to memorize the periodic table) over capacities like being able to make sense of the world, or being able to find meaning and purpose in life. 

### The last domino to fall: Genuine teacherly authority

The worst part of all this is that apart form the carbon pulse, and the credible trust people had in the progress narrative, **we are now losing the only other thing that held up our modern education system together: which is the value that truly exceptional teachers brought to the table**. These amazing teachers were the only vehicles that allowed for those rare moments where meaning, life-purpose, and sense-making were informally introduced to the curriculum despite the fundemental logic of the prussian system working agaisnt it. We all know just how important these teachers were in the education system. Just ask people what their best memories of high school were. You are likely to hear many stories about that one teacher who changed their lives, that one teacher who was able to truly connect with them on a deep level and gain their trust. That one teacher who taught them invaluable life skills that motivated them to keep going despite all the forces working agaisnt them. 

Those teachers are mostly all gone from the public school system, even the most dedicated and hard working teacher can only take in so much abuse, they can only be devalued for so long before they give up and move on to greener pastures. This is where we are. This is the situation teachers have been warning us about in recent years. Today millions of kids are going through an educational system where even the teachers are abandoning them. The social fabric won't be able to handle this for much longer. Civilizations that abandon their youth will collapse.

People who look at the situation honestly really shouldn't be surprised by the increasing lawlessness in classrooms, the decrease in literacy, and the mental health crisis in youth. Someone who looks at the situation superficially might conclude that we need to go down the strongmen route and force students to respect teachers. But again, those magical moments where students and teachers form a genuine bond that allows for deep learning can only be fostered in an environment where students have a reason to value the knowledge that the teacher possesses. When students realize that the way to succeed through the education system is by learning how to memorize information and how to cheat without getting caught, students no longer have the incentive to value the teacher for the knowledge they have related to their domain of expertise. As soon as schools lose the capacity to produce a relationship between students and teachers built on genuine respect and trust, where deeper, more vulnerable, and more meaningful conversations can be had, you lose the capacity to impart the knowledge required to not only maintain industrial civilizational structures, but more critically you lose all hopes of being able to teach future generations the skills and knowledge they will need throughout the great unraveling. 

### Nothing hurts more than being abandonned

Just try to place yourself in the shoes of a 14-year-old entering high school. You've been told repeatedly that your generation is suffering from a mental health crisis with [suicide rates up almost 200%](https://www.afterbabel.com/p/international-mental-health-gbd). You are repeatedly told that this is most likely caused by social media corporations having free-reign to design apps that directly abuse your under-developed limbic system to more easily hijack your reward system and create unwanted addictions that make you depressed. Despite this you notice that the adults of the world who are supposed to be protecting you from harm are not only failing to regulate these social media corporations but even your school administration can't even be bothered to enforce their own policies that prohibit smartphones from being used in class. Even worse, you come home after school and you notice that even your parents dont even bother imposing restrictions on phone use at home. This is the type of day-to-day environement that a majority of kids experience. Obviously, they are gonna start to internalize that the crucial institutions responsible for their wellbeing are actively abdicating on their responsibily to care for them and to prepare them for the future. In this environement it is quite logical to expect students to reciprocate with the same lack of respect shown to them by the institutions. You can make the same argument for a bunch of other issues our society is completely failing to adress, like the climate crisis. The kids aren't stupid they know we are failing them. And this is what hurts them. Nothing hurts more than knowing that those who are meant to care for your well-being end up abandoning you. 

And so all this begs the question, how will our education system be able to cope in the age of [the great unraveling](https://www.postcarbon.org/publications/welcome-to-the-great-unraveling/)? What happens when the ecological, economic, geopolitical, and energy crises become so severe that teachers are no longer able to imbue a sense of legitamacy to their authority when the curriculum they are forced to teach becomes so detached from the reality that encompasses the expectations students have about their future? Will those in positions of power allow radical reforms to the educational system to take place in order to ensure that future generations are equipped with the knowledge and skill sets required to thrive in a low-energy, simplified, and de-globalized civilization? Or will elite panic lead them to double down and further cement efforts to preserve the system as it is, with it's focus on piting students agaisnt each other via mass testing, prioritizing a cirriculum that instills dangerous expectations about the future, and a system that increasingly abandons millions of it's youth in a deep crisis of meaning and loneliness. I think i know the direction we are going, but hopefully i'm proven wrong.